Documentation: First Hour Improvements including #553 (#1153)
ocaml/v3.ocaml.org: data/tutorials/gs_01_a_first_hour_with_ocaml.md

---
id: first-hour
title: Your First Day with OCaml
description: >
  Discover the OCaml programming language in this longer tutorial that takes you
  from absolute beginner to someone who is able to write programs in OCaml.
category: "getting-started"
date: 2021-08-06T17:11:00-00:00
---

# Your First Day with OCaml

This tutorial will not only give you the basics of OCaml, but it will
also guide you through creating your first applications with OCaml.
You can follow along with a basic OCaml installation,
as described in [Up and Running](/docs/up-and-running).

Alternatively, you may follow almost all of it by running OCaml in your browser
using the [OCaml Playground](https://ocaml.org/play), with no installation required.

On macOS/iOS/iPadOS, you can download this [all-in-one package on the App Store](https://apps.apple.com/app/ocaml-learn-code/id1547506826). It contains an editor side-by-side with an interactive toplevel. Plus, it's free and [open source](https://github.com/GroupeMINASTE/OCaml-iOS).

> **Note:** The OCaml code examples in this tutorial start with a prompt `#`.

Reviewer: For consistency, I would use a code block instead of the inline equivalent so users can see what we are talking about:
```ocaml
#
```

This prompt is not part of the code, it's a hint to you that the code
following it should be either entered into an interactive toplevel, or
into the OCaml Playground.
## Running OCaml Programs

### Using an OCaml toplevel (REPL)

We recommend using UTop (see [here](/docs/up-and-running#using-the-ocaml-toplevel-with-utop)),
but alternatively, the basic toplevel of OCaml (`ocaml` command) can also be used. For installation instructions,
see [Up and Running](/docs/up-and-running#installing-ocaml).

If you have never used a toplevel (REPL) before, think of it as an interactive terminal/shell that

> evaluates expressions. You type an expression followed by the Enter or Return key,

Reviewer: "type" -> "write" (type made me think of typing at first, I had to reread the sentence a few times, but maybe that's just me)

Author: ohh, typing in the context of types... :see_no_evil: Yes, I can see how that reads strangely.

> and then the toplevel responds with the value of the evaluated expression.

Reviewer: We can add that we are using the REPL because we are trying out different elements of the languages and we are not aiming at building a consistent library or binary, for which we would not use the REPL but we would build with `dune`. And these are 2 different workflows.

---
id: first-hour
title: Your First Day with OCaml
description: >
  Discover the OCaml programming language in this longer tutorial that takes you
  from absolute beginner to someone who is able to write programs in OCaml.
category: "getting-started"
date: 2021-08-06T17:11:00-00:00
---

# Your First Day with OCaml

This tutorial will walk you through the basics of OCaml by trying
out different elements of the language in an interactive context.

> Only at the very end of the tutorial we consider briefly how

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
At the end of the tutorial, we consider briefly how
```

to compile an OCaml program into a binary executable.

You can follow along with a basic OCaml installation,
as described in [Up and Running](/docs/up-and-running).

Alternatively, you may follow almost all of it by running OCaml in your browser
using the [OCaml Playground](https://ocaml.org/play), with no installation required.

On macOS/iOS/iPadOS, you can download this [all-in-one package on the App Store](https://apps.apple.com/app/ocaml-learn-code/id1547506826). It contains an editor side-by-side with an interactive toplevel. Plus, it's free and [open source](https://github.com/GroupeMINASTE/OCaml-iOS).

**Note**: The OCaml code examples in this tutorial start with a prompt

```ocaml
#
```

This prompt is not part of the code, it's a hint to you that the code
following it should be either entered into an interactive toplevel, or
into the OCaml Playground.

## Running OCaml Programs

> ### Using an OCaml toplevel (REPL)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Using an OCaml Toplevel (REPL)
```

We recommend using UTop (see [here](/docs/up-and-running#using-the-ocaml-toplevel-with-utop)),

> but alternatively, the basic toplevel of OCaml (`ocaml` command) can also be used. For installation instructions,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
but alternatively, the basic OCaml toplevel (`ocaml` command) can also be used. For installation instructions,
```

see [Up and Running](/docs/up-and-running#installing-ocaml).

If you have never used a toplevel (REPL) before, think of it as an interactive terminal/shell that
evaluates expressions. You write an expression followed by the Enter or Return key,

> and then the toplevel responds with the value of the evaluated expression.

Reviewer 2: I love this explanation!

> ```

Reviewer: The `;;` is missing

Note that `#use` is not part of the OCaml language proper; it's an instruction
to the OCaml toplevel only. Also, for `ocaml` or `utop` to find your file, you
may need to start `ocaml` or `utop` inside the directory of your file, use a
relative path that takes into account the directory you started the toplevel in,
or use an absolute path.

> ### Using the OCaml Playground

Reviewer: Would it make sense to move this section in a separate page, before the "Get up and running" ? So people can try it and see if they like it before installing anything? This should probably be advertised better on the Learn page (currently only reachable from the top side menu)

Author: I think there's some overlap with https://staging.ocaml.org/docs/up-and-running#first-steps-with-ocaml which also explains how to use the REPL - which appears quite redundant but is currently needed because we cannot assume that people have read all of "Get Up and Running". I'm not entirely sure how to resolve this, since a dedicated page about only the playground is probably too short. A dedicated page about running OCaml in an interactive context might work to introduce both the REPL and the Playground and how they differ. The other tutorials that are intended to be perused in an interactive context could then reference it.

I think you're right that we need a "try OCaml" kind of flow where people go from the main landing page directly to a tutorial that runs in the playground. One possibility I envision is that we can extend the Playground with an interactive tutorial similar to https://svelte.dev/tutorial/basics. Something completely friction-less where people do not have to skim over irrelevant passages and get a hands-on tutorial.

Reviewer: Having a tutorial running in the playground would be great indeed!

```

Note that `#use` is not part of the OCaml language proper; it's an instruction
to the OCaml toplevel only. Also, for `ocaml` or `utop` to find your file, you
may need to start `ocaml` or `utop` inside the directory of your file, use a
relative path that takes into account the directory you started the toplevel in,
or use an absolute path.

### Using the OCaml Playground

The in-browser [OCaml Playground](https://ocaml.org/play), which you can
use without installing anything, has this interface:

![OCaml Playground](/media/tutorials/ocaml-playground.png)

> There are two windows: the editor window (on the left) is where you write code,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There are two windows: the editor window (on the left) is where you write code, and
```

the output window (on the right) is where all the answers from OCaml appear.

Instead of entering code examples line by line on a prompt, as in the toplevel,

> you type or copy code into the editor window. To run all code in the editor window,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
type or copy code directly into the editor window. To run all code in the editor window,
```

> you click on the "Run" button at the bottom of the editor window.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
click on the "Run" button at the bottom of the editor window.
```

When using the OCaml Playground, it is not required to end expressions with
`;;`. In this sense, the OCaml Playground behaves similar to how you would

> write OCaml code in a file.

Reviewer 2: Really?! That's interesting and important to point out!

## Expressions and Variables

```ocaml
# 50 * 50;;
- : int = 2500
```

> In OCaml, expressions have types and `50 * 50` is an expression that evaluates to the `int` type value of `2500`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In OCaml, expressions have types, and `50 * 50` is an expression that evaluates to the `int` type value of `2500`.
```

Other primitive types in OCaml include `float`, `string`, and `bool`.

To avoid repetition, we can assign a name to a value using the `let` keyword:

```ocaml
# let x = 50;;
val x : int = 50

# x * x;;
- : int = 2500
```

When we type `let x = 50;;` and Enter, the REPL responds with the variable's value (`val`),
showing that `x` now means `50`. So `x * x;;` evaluates to the same answer as `50 * 50;;`.

It's important to note that, unlike in imperative languages,
variables in OCaml are *immutable*, meaning their value cannot
change after assignment. Also, variable names must begin with
a lowercase letter or an underscore, and they cannot contain dashes

> (e.g., `x-plus-y` is not a legal variable name, but `x_plus_y` is).

Reviewer 2: OMG. This is all so great for beginners! Nicely done!

We can combine a variable declaration with an expression using the `let` ... `in` ... syntax:

```ocaml
# let x = 50 in x * x;;
- : int = 2500
```

This declares the variable `x` and assigns it the value `50`,
  which is then used in the expression `x * x`, resulting in the value of `2500`.

Note that `let` ... `in` ... and `let` ... are two fundamentally different things:

* `let x = 50;;` is a *variable declaration*. It assigns the value `50` to the variable `x`,
which is bound in the toplevel.
* `let x = 50 in x * x;;` is an *expression that includes a variable declaration*: The variable `x`
is only bound within the expression following the `in` keyword.

```ocaml
# let x = 50 in x * x;;
- : int = 2500

# x;;

> Error: Unbound value x

Reviewer 2: Here I get the same answer `- : int = 50`, not the Error

Author: Thank you, I think I have to use a different name for the variable, because `x` is still bound from the expressions that were evaluated beforehand.

- : int = 3
```

This defines two variables `a` and `b` with the values of `1` and `2` respectively,
and then uses them in the expression `a + b`, resulting in the value of `3`.
It's important to note that this is just a single expression.
The OCaml toplevel knows the expression isn't complete until it sees the `;;`.

## Functions

The `let` keyword can also be used to define a function:

```ocaml
# let square x = x * x;;
val square : int -> int = <fun>

# square 50;;
- : int = 2500
```

This defines a function named `square` which has one argument, namely `x`, and

> its result is equal to (`=`) the result of the expression `x * x`. The expression

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
its result is equal to (`=`), the result of the expression `x * x`. The expression
```

that defines the result of a function is called *function body*.

> When we apply the function as `square 50;;`, this evaluates to the function body
> of `square` where `x` is bound to `50`, and thus, we get a result of `50 * 50 = 2500`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When we apply the function as `square 50;;`, it evaluates to the function body
of `square`, where `x` is bound to `50`, so we get a result of `50 * 50 = 2500`.
```

When using `let` to define a function, the first identifier is the function name (`square`, above),
then any additional identifiers are the different arguments of the function. In our example above,
the `square` function has only one argument `x`.

In OCaml, functions are values, so the REPL responds to the function definition
with `val square : int -> int = <fun>`.
The type `int -> int` tells us that the function `square` takes an integer and returns an integer.

Here is a different function which uses the comparison operator `=`
to test whether a given number is even:

```ocaml
# let square_is_even x =
    square x mod 2 = 0;;
val square_is_even : int -> bool = <fun>

# square_is_even 50;;
- : bool = true

# square_is_even 3;;
- : bool = false
```

Notice that OCaml infers the type `int -> bool` for this function,
which means that `square_is_even` is a function that takes
one Integer value (`int`) as an argument and returns a Boolean value (`bool`).

> The Boolean operator *and* is denoted with `&&` and *or* is denoted with `||`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Boolean operator *and* is denoted with `&&`, and *or* is denoted with `||`.
```

> A function may take multiple arguments which are separated by spaces.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A function may take multiple arguments, separated by spaces.
```

val average : float -> float -> float = <fun>
```

> This is rather unusual. In many other languages (such as C) integers get promoted to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This is rather unusual. In many other languages (such as C), integers get promoted to
```

> floating point values in certain circumstances. For example, if you write `1 + 2.5` in C
> then the first argument (which is an integer) is promoted to a floating

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
floating point values in certain circumstances. For example, if you write `1 + 2.5` in C,
the first argument (which is an integer) is promoted to a floating
```

Notice the type of the function `f` in parentheses as part of the whole type.
This `map` function, given a function of type `'a -> 'b` and a list of `'a`s,
will build a list of `'b`s. Sometimes `'a` and `'b` might be the same type, of

> course. The function `map` is a *higher-order function* since one of its parameters

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
course. The function `map` is a *higher-order function*, since one of its parameters
```

(The syntax `fun` ... `->` ... is used to build a function without a name, which
we'll only use in one place in the program.)

We can apply a function by providing only some of its arguments. This is called *partial

> application* and the value we get back from such a partial application is a new function. For example:

Reviewer: We can add that this new function takes the remaining "non-applied" arguments of the original function as its own arguments. This might sound obvious from the following code block but it might help?

(The syntax `fun` ... `->` ... is used to build a function without a name, which
we'll only use in one place in the program.)

We can apply a function by providing only some of its arguments. This is called *partial

> application*: the value we get back from such a partial application is a new function

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
application*. The value we get back from such a partial application is a new function
```

## Other Built-In Types

We have seen basic data types like `int`, and our first compound data type, the
list. Let us look at two more data types of interest.

First we have tuples, which are fixed-length collections of elements of any type:

```ocaml
# let t = (1, "one", '1');;
val t : int * string * char = (1, "one", '1')
```

Notice how the type is written: the individual types that make up a tuple

> are separated by `*`.

Reviewer: However, the values of the tuple are separated by a `,`
